<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#"><head><meta charset="utf-8"/><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1"/><title>3. Valentin Haüy</title><meta content="Valentin Haüy - the father of the education for the blind" name="dc:Title"/><meta content="Beatrice Christensen Sköld" name="dc:Creator"/><meta content="C00000" name="dc:Identifier"/><meta content="TPB" name="dc:Publisher"/><meta content="en-GB" name="dc:Language"/><meta content="2006-03-23" name="dc:Date"/><meta content="C00000" name="dtb:uid"/><style type="text/css" xml:space="preserve">
                .spell-out { -epub-speak-as: spell-out; }
                .list-preformatted { list-style-type: none; }
                table[class^="table-rules-"], table[class*=" table-rules-"] { border-width: thin; border-style: hidden; }
                table[class^="table-rules-"]:not(.table-rules-none), table[class*=" table-rules-"]:not(.table-rules-none) { border-collapse: collapse; }
                table[class^="table-rules-"] td, table[class*=" table-rules-"] td { border-width: thin; border-style: none; }
                table[class^="table-rules-"] th, table[class*=" table-rules-"] th { border-width: thin; border-style: none; }
                table.table-rules-none td, table.table-rules-none th { border-width: thin; border-style: hidden; }
                table.table-rules-all td, table.table-rules-all th { border-width: thin; border-style: solid; }
                table.table-rules-cols td, table.table-rules-cols th { border-left-width: thin; border-right-width: thin; border-left-style: solid; border-right-style: solid; }
                table.table-rules-rows tr { border-top-width: thin; border-bottom-width: thin; border-top-style: solid; border-bottom-style: solid; }
                table.table-rules-groups colgroup { border-left-width: thin; border-right-width: thin; border-left-style: solid; border-right-style: solid; }
                table.table-rules-groups tfoot, table.table-rules-groups thead, table.table-rules-groups tbody { border-top-width: thin; border-bottom-width: thin; border-top-style: solid; border-bottom-style: solid; }
                table[class^="table-frame-"], table[class*=" table-frame-"] { border: thin hidden; }
                table.table-frame-void { border-style: hidden; }
                table.table-frame-above { border-style: outset hidden hidden hidden; }
                table.table-frame-below { border-style: hidden hidden outset hidden; }
                table.table-frame-lhs { border-style: hidden hidden hidden outset; }
                table.table-frame-rhs { border-style: hidden outset hidden hidden; }
                table.table-frame-hsides { border-style: outset hidden; }
                table.table-frame-vsides { border-style: hidden outset; }
                table.table-frame-box { border-style: outset; }
                table.table-frame-border { border-style: outset; }
                </style><link xmlns:c="http://www.w3.org/ns/xproc-step" xmlns:px="http://www.daisy.org/ns/pipeline/xproc" xmlns:d="http://www.daisy.org/ns/pipeline/data" xmlns:dtbook="http://www.daisy.org/z3986/2005/dtbook/" xmlns:html="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:cx="http://xmlcalabash.com/ns/extensions" xmlns:pxi="http://www.daisy.org/ns/pipeline/xproc/internal" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/accessibility.css"/><link rel="prev" href="chapter3.xhtml"/><link rel="next" href="chapter5.xhtml"/></head><body id="d910e1012" epub:type="bodymatter"><h1 id="d910e1014">
               <span id="dtb198" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3. </span>
               <span id="dtb199" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Valentin Haüy</span>
            </h1><section id="d910e1023" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e1025">
                  <span id="dtb200" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.1 Introduction</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb201" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Special education for the deaf, the visually handicapped and the disabled has its roots in the France of the Enlightenment, a period of growing interest in the creation of organised education for the handicapped. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1036" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb202">In 1760, the abbé l'épée founded the first school for the deaf, where his educational methods were based on the teaching of sign language </span>
                     <a id="dtb203" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_5">5</a>
                     <span id="dtb204">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e1048" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb205">Interest in education methods for the disabled began to develop seriously in the early years of the 19th century </span>
                     <a id="dtb206" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_6">6</a>
                     <span id="dtb207">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1063" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb208">The debate on the social value of the handicapped and their learning capacity began with John Locke (1632-1704) and his essay "The Molyneux Problem," included in "An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" </span>
                     <a id="dtb209" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_7">7</a>
                     <span id="dtb210">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb211" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Locke received a letter from William Molyneux, an Irishman, dated 2nd March 1693, in which the following question was posed: "If a person who was born blind, and who has learnt to distinguish by touch between a cube and a sphere regains vision after an operation, will he then be able to distinguish the cube from the sphere by sight alone?" </span>
                  <span id="d910e1078" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <a id="dtb212" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_8">8</a>
                     <span id="dtb213">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb214" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Locke had a great influence on the French philosophers of the Enlightenment, and the famous debate on the "Molyneux problem" inspired the French philosopher Denis Diderot (1713-1784) to make contact with blind people and later publish his experiences in a pamphlet, Lettre sur les Aveugles pour Ceux qui voient (A Letter to the Blind for Those Who Can See). </span>
                  <span id="dtb215" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His letter served several purposes. </span>
                  <span id="dtb216" epub:type="z3998:sentence">On the one hand, Diderot exposed a fraud which had taken place in the drawing-room of the scientist S.A. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1099" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb217">Réaumur , while on the other he made a number of observations which were a radical criticism of the conventional ideas of the time </span>
                     <a id="dtb218" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_9">9</a>
                     <span id="dtb219">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb220" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The fraud in question consisted of a performance by a girl who claimed to be blind in Réaumur's drawing-room during which she played, sang and answered a series of general knowledge questions (for example, the length of certain rivers, the names of European cities, etc.). </span>
                  <span id="dtb221" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Diderot unmasked this humbug, but also pointed out that fraudulent performances were unnecessary, since the blind could in fact be educated. </span>
                  <span id="dtb222" epub:type="z3998:sentence">As an example of this, he mentioned the blind English mathematician Nicholas Saunderson. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1121" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb223">In the second half of his letter, Diderot has Saunderson express, in an imaginary dialogue, his own atheistic philosophy of life, for which Diderot paid with a brief sojourn in prison </span>
                     <a id="dtb224" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_10">10</a>
                     <span id="dtb225">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb226" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Diderot's letter made the bourgeoisie of the time aware that the blind could in fact be educated. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1139" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb227">He went on to found a philanthrophic society in 1780 - the Société Philanthropique </span>
                     <a id="dtb228" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_11">11</a>
                     <span id="dtb229">, which opened up homes for the blind where they were taught handicrafts. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e1151" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb230">These "homes for the blind" -"Maisons des Enfans-Aveugles"- took in blind persons between the ages of 20 and 25 </span>
                     <a id="dtb231" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_12">12</a>
                     <span id="dtb232">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_8" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="8"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb233" epub:type="z3998:sentence">With the support of the Société Philanthropique,Valentin Haüy founded the first special school for blind children and adolescents in 1784.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1176" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb234">Diderot himself had a blind pupil, Mélanie de Salignac (1741-1763), who was his friend Sophie Volland's niece </span>
                     <a id="dtb235" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_13">13</a>
                     <span id="dtb236">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb237" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He wrote about her in Addition de Lettre sur les Aveugles. </span>
                  <span id="dtb238" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Salignac was mainly taught, however, by her mother. </span>
                  <span id="dtb239" epub:type="z3998:sentence">She could read and write and, what is particularly interesting, she wrote in raised print, which Haüy then experimented with on a larger scale.</span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e1199" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e1201">
                  <span id="dtb240" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.2 Biographical background</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb241" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Valentin Haüy was born on 13th November 1745 in Saint-Just en Chaussé (Picardy), a small village approximately 35 km east of Paris. </span>
                  <span id="dtb242" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His father was a weaver. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1215" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb243">Haüy's elder brother, the abbé René Just Haüy (1743-1822), was the pioneer of crystallography (the science of the structure, forms and property of crystals) and played an important role in the introduction of the metric system </span>
                     <a id="dtb244" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_14">14</a>
                     <span id="dtb245">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb246" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In 1751, the family took up residence in Paris and the two brothers began to attend a school run by a Catholic order. </span>
                  <span id="dtb247" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Later, both of them studied at the Sorbonne; Valentin studied Latin, Greek and Hebrew and was said to be fluent in about ten modern languages. </span>
                  <span id="dtb248" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He earned a living as a translator of private and public documents and was soon able to boast the title of Royal Interpreter. </span>
                  <span id="dtb249" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He was also interpreter to the city council of Paris and the Admiralty. </span>
                  <span id="dtb250" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Before his appointment as royal interpreter he had become senior master in a secondary school. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1246" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb251">He later became a member of the Bureau Académique des écritures, founded by Louis XVI, probably because he had invented a method of deciphering secret codes and military code systems </span>
                     <a id="dtb252" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_15">15</a>
                     <span id="dtb253">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb254" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In 1771, the French police began to take an interest in deciphering codes, and during the following ten years, Valentin Haüy worked for the secret police, where his task was to investigate all foreign correspondence carried by the French postal service and to decipher secret documents. </span>
                  <span id="dtb255" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He continued these activities under the various revolutionary governments in the latter part of the century.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb256" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was also interested in the education of the deaf. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1270" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb257">He is said to have been actively involved in the teaching of deaf pupils and to have worked from time to time with the abbé l'épée </span>
                     <a id="dtb258" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_16">16</a>
                     <span id="dtb259">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e1282" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb260">We can assume that his interest in the handicapped had already been aroused in 1771 when he visited one of the public performances given by the abbé's deaf pupils </span>
                     <a id="dtb261" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_17">17</a>
                     <span id="dtb262">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e1296" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e1298">
                  <span id="dtb263" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.3 The market in St Ovid's Square</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1306" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb264">In a letter to his son, Haüy tells how during the annual market in St Ovid's Square in Paris, he saw blind musicians from the Quinze-Vingt asylum perform </span>
                     <a id="dtb265" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_18">18</a>
                     <span id="dtb266">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb267" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He was sitting at a café when he saw some very strange creatures fitted with huge paper spectacles and pointed hats with donkey's ears affixed to them. </span>
                  <span id="dtb268" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Sheet music was placed upside down on the blind musicians' music stands while they banged, blew, and squeezed noises out of their worn-out instruments.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb269" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was shocked by the way the disabled musicians' wretchedness was exaggerated by their ridiculous outfits. </span>
                  <span id="dtb270" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He was also upset by the callousness of the audience, who howled with laughter at this shambles of an orchestra. </span>
                  <span id="dtb271" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy did not see any reason to laugh at people just because they had a physical impediment.</span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_9" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="9"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb272" epub:type="z3998:sentence">From that day he decided to dedicate his life to improving the conditions of the blind.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb273" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In his letter, he reflects:</span>
               </p>
               <blockquote id="dtb274">
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb275" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"We asked ourselves: does not a blind person recognise objects by their different shapes? 
     </span>
                     <span id="dtb276" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Is he mistaken as to the value of a coin? </span>
                     <span id="dtb277" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Why should it be impossible for him to distinguish between a C and a G, or between an A and an F, if those letters were made easier to distinguish? </span>
                     <span id="dtb278" epub:type="z3998:sentence">We sometimes reflected on the use of this performance (...)</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb279" epub:type="z3998:sentence">We soon saw various examples that convinced us how useful it would be for the blind to have access to teaching methods which could increase their knowledge so that they would not have to wait for help or sometimes ask the sighted to help them, often to no avail"</span>
                  </p>
               </blockquote>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1379" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <a id="dtb280" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_19">19</a>
                     <span id="dtb281">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e1390" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e1392">
                  <span id="dtb282" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.4 Maria Theresia von Paradis (1733-1808)</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb283" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Maria Theresia von Paradis was a woman who had a significant influence on Haüy and his teaching methods. </span>
                  <span id="dtb284" epub:type="z3998:sentence">They met in Paris in 1785 while Paradis was on a concert tour of Europe. </span>
                  <span id="dtb285" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Weygand (1998) says that Haüy read an article in a Parisian newspaper informing the public that the blind child prodigy Mara Theresia von Paradis was in the city and decided to contact her. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1409" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb286">Maria Theresia von Paradis was born in Vienna and became blind at about 4 years of age </span>
                     <a id="dtb287" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_20">20</a>
                     <span id="dtb288">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb289" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Jantsch suggests that the girl's blindness had hysterical origins. </span>
                  <span id="dtb290" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Her father was a well-to-do lawyer. </span>
                  <span id="dtb291" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Maria Theresia was extremely musical and became a virtuoso on the piano; she had her own school in Vienna where she taught piano and singing. </span>
                  <span id="dtb292" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Between 1784 and 1785, she toured Europe, playing at the courts of Paris, London, Brussels, Hanover and Berlin, and giving concerts in several other cities. </span>
                  <span id="dtb293" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Mozart composed a concerto for piano and orchestra especially for her European tour and von Paradis also wrote her own music, using a system for writing musical notes which she had had specially invented. </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb294" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Before von Paradis set off on her grand tour of Europe, she had relief maps made of the different countries and cities she was to visit. </span>
                  <span id="dtb295" epub:type="z3998:sentence">On these maps, frontiers and rivers were embroidered in backstitch, while cities and towns were represented by different-sized buttons; large buttons for capitals, smaller buttons for smaller cities or towns. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1446" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb296">Von Paradis had raised texts printed; a special printing press was made for her by Wolfgang Ritter von Kempelen </span>
                     <a id="dtb297" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_21">21</a>
                     <span id="dtb298">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb299" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Von Paradis corresponded with Johan Ludwig Weissenburg, who was also blind and who himself used raised maps and writing. </span>
                  <span id="dtb300" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Their letters show that they discussed how raised pictures and maps could be made. </span>
                  <span id="dtb301" epub:type="z3998:sentence">For mathematical calculations, Paradis used an arithmetic board made in England by Saunderson. </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1473" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb302">Haüy's meeting with Maria Theresia von Paradis gave him the inspiration and encouragement he so desperately needed at that time to develop an educational programme for blind children </span>
                     <a id="dtb303" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_22">22</a>
                     <span id="dtb304">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e1485" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb305">He presented his plan, "Plan de l'Education à l'Usage des Aveugles," to the Philanthropic Society, which at that time sponsored twelve children from poor families </span>
                     <a id="dtb306" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_23">23</a>
                     <span id="dtb307">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1501" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb308">In his Essai sur l'Education des Enfans-Aveugles </span>
                     <a id="dtb309" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_24">24</a>
                     <span id="dtb310">, Haüy repeatedly mentions that several of the tools he recommended for the teaching of blind children had been used by Maria Theresia von Paradis. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_10" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="10"/>
            </section><section id="d910e1519" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e1521">
                  <span id="dtb311" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.5 Haüy's meeting with Lesueur and the founding of l'Institution des Jeunes Aveugles</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1529" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb312">Haüy was convinced that the blind deserved a better life than begging and performing in market places </span>
                     <a id="dtb313" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_25">25</a>
                     <span id="dtb314">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb315" epub:type="z3998:sentence">They ought to enjoy the same right to education and work as the sighted. </span>
                  <span id="dtb316" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Not until thirteen years after the market in St Ovid's Square did he have an opportunity to demonstrate that the blind could be educated. </span>
                  <span id="dtb317" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This occurred when he was invited to teach François Lesueur, or Le Sueur, as Didier-Weygand sometimes writes his name.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1553" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb318">Haüy first met Lesueur, standing begging at the entrance to the church of Saint-Germain-des Prés </span>
                     <a id="dtb319" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_26">26</a>
                     <span id="dtb320">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e1565" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb321">Lesueur was a professional beggar who supported himself, his parents and four siblings with the money he was given by churchgoers (since the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church had allowed the blind to beg outside churches) </span>
                     <a id="dtb322" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_27">27</a>
                     <span id="dtb323">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1580" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb324">The story goes on to tell how Haüy, when he gave Lesueur some money, was told, "You thought you gave me a measly sou when in fact it was an écu " </span>
                     <a id="dtb325" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_28">28</a>
                     <span id="dtb326">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb327" epub:type="z3998:sentence">From this incident Haüy immediately drew conclusions regarding the fine sense of touch the blind possess. </span>
                  <span id="dtb328" epub:type="z3998:sentence">If we compare this version of their meeting with Haüy's own words in section 3.3, we can guess how the story originated.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb329" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy started by teaching Lesueur good manners, grammatically correct speech and arithmetic. </span>
                  <span id="dtb330" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy's main interest, however, was teaching the blind to read. </span>
                  <span id="dtb331" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He had wooden letters made so that Lesueur could learn the alphabet and later learn to read. </span>
                  <span id="dtb332" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This was achieved by forming the letters into words in a wooden frame. </span>
                  <span id="dtb333" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In a similar way, Lesueur learned the four arithmetical rules; in this case, wooden numbers were placed in different compartments in a frame. </span>
                  <span id="dtb334" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A major problem proved to be a supply of books for Lesueur. </span>
                  <span id="dtb335" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy soon realised that his pupil could recognise raised letters, so he began to produce raised letters on waxed paper. </span>
                  <span id="dtb336" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy had started teaching Lesueur on 31st May 1784. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1626" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb337">By September of the same year, he was able to announce his progress in an article in the Journal de Paris </span>
                     <a id="dtb338" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_29">29</a>
                     <span id="dtb339">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb340" epub:type="z3998:sentence">On November 18th, both teacher and pupil appeared before the Académie de l'écriture. </span>
                  <span id="dtb341" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was common practice at that time for pupils to appear before the Academy and the Court, and not just "handicapped prodigies". </span>
                  <span id="d910e1645" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb342">The Academy apparently fulfilled some kind of educational inspecting and authorising function </span>
                     <a id="dtb343" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_30">30</a>
                     <span id="dtb344">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb345" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Lesueur could read, recognise countries on a map and identify raised numbers on cardboard. </span>
                  <span id="dtb346" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This made Haüy's name as a teacher of the blind. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1667" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb347">The Academy decided to recommend his methods of teaching the blind </span>
                     <a id="dtb348" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_31">31</a>
                     <span id="dtb349">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb350" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Thanks to Haüy's brother René-Just, the French Academy of Science became interested in his teaching methods. </span>
                  <span id="dtb351" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Four members of the Academy studied Haüy's methods and expressed their approval. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1686" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb352">Their report was registered by the Academy on 16th February 1785 </span>
                     <a id="dtb353" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_32">32</a>
                     <span id="dtb354">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb355" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In January 1785, Haüy became a member of the Société Philanthropique which also entrusted him with the teaching of their twelve blind protégés. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1704" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb356">These were all young adults aged between 20 and 30 </span>
                     <a id="dtb357" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_33">33</a>
                     <span id="dtb358">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb359" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy could now rent a house in the Rue Coquillère where he taught his pupils. </span>
                  <span id="dtb360" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A year later, when the number of pupils had increased, he moved into a house in the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Victoires, where the Société Philanthropique had its workshop for the blind, and so l'Institution des Jeunes Aveugles (the Institute for Blind Children ) was born. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1722" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb361">The pupils who now arrived at the institute were young children </span>
                     <a id="dtb362" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_34">34</a>
                     <span id="dtb363">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_11" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="11"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb364" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Twice a year the blind children performed before the Court. </span>
                  <span id="dtb365" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Louis XVI was patron of the institute and also contributed economically to its upkeep. </span>
                  <span id="dtb366" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In an appendix to Haüy's pamphlet, Essai sur l'éducation des Aveugles, there is a list of the first twelve pupils to perform at the Court.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb367" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Boys and girls alike attended the institute. </span>
                  <span id="dtb368" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The blind children came from poor homes and were not charged for their tuition. </span>
                  <span id="dtb369" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy did, however, accept sighted children from well-to-do families who paid for their children's education. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1761" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb370">Haüy believed that sighted and blind children should be educated together without restriction </span>
                     <a id="dtb371" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_35">35</a>
                     <span id="dtb372">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e1775" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e1777">
                  <span id="dtb373" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.6 Valentin Haüy's teaching methods</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb374" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Valentin Haüy's first and only pamphlet on his teaching methods was published in 1786 with the long title of Essai sur l'éducation des aveugles ou Exposé de différens moyens, vérifiés par l'expérience, pour les mettre en état de lire, à l'aide du tact, d'imprimer des livres dans lesquels ils puissent prendre des connaissances des langues, d'histoire, de la Géographie, de la Musique, &amp;c., d'exécuter différens travaux relatifs aux Métiers, &amp;c., Dédié au Roi, par M. </span>
                  <span id="dtb375" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy. </span>
                  <span id="dtb376" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was printed by Haüy's blind pupils. </span>
                  <span id="dtb377" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Only the preface was set in normal type; the main text was set in the type created by Haüy for use with ink print or raised print. </span>
                  <span id="dtb378" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was dedicated to the French king, Louis XVI. </span>
                  <span id="dtb379" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The title page reads, "Au Roi", followed by a brief preface dedicated to the king:</span>
               </p>
               <blockquote id="dtb380">
                  <p id="d910e1807" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb381" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"To the KING OF FRANCE</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1813" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb382" epub:type="z3998:sentence">SIRE,</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb383" epub:type="z3998:sentence">THE Protection with which your Majesty honours distinguished Talents ascertains your Claim to their Reverence and Respect. </span>
                     <span id="dtb384" epub:type="z3998:sentence">But when their Productions have a Tendency to console the Miseries of suffering Humanity, they have still a more powerful Title to attract the attention of Louis the Beneficent. </span>
                     <span id="dtb385" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was under the influence of Sentiments inspired by a Title so amiable, which is deeply engraven on all the Hearts of France, that I conceived the desire of presenting to your Majesty the Fruits of my Labours ; if they have any Value, they will owe it to the double Advantage of appearing under a Patronage so august, and of becoming Vehicles to the Bounty expected from Sovereign by the Young and unhappy, who have been early deprived of the Benefit of Light with all its numerous and important Resources.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1831" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb386" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I am, With the profoundest respect,</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1837" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb387" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Sire,</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1844" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb388" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Your Majesty’s most humble,</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1850" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb389" epub:type="z3998:sentence">must obedient</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1856" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb390" epub:type="z3998:sentence">and most faithful subject and Servant,</span>
                  </p>
                  <p id="d910e1862" class="line">
                     <span id="dtb391" epub:type="z3998:sentence">HAÙY".</span>
                  </p>
               </blockquote>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb392" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In his essay Haüy expounds his pedagogical theories and presents a programme of studies for blind children. </span>
                  <span id="dtb393" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His basic premise was that the "unfortunate Blind," who until then had been deprived of education, could in fact be educated and ought therefore to be given the opportunity to attend school and learn a trade by which they could later make a living.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb394" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Each subject is dealt with in a short chapter. </span>
                  <span id="dtb395" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy gives simple, practical advice on teaching methods and on the production of material for use in object lessons and of a variety of teaching aids.</span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_12" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="12"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb396" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He lays particular stress on the methods to be used to teach blind children to read and write and on how to produce raised print books. </span>
                  <span id="dtb397" epub:type="z3998:sentence">An entire chapter is dedicated to explaining how blind pupils can be trained as compositors. </span>
                  <span id="dtb398" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He also attempts to demonstrate that those blind pupils who did learn some kind of handicraft (at Quinze-Vingt, for example) were able to earn their own living. </span>
                  <span id="dtb399" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy therefore recommends that teaching of the blind should include activities such as the production of walking sticks and hairnets, sewing, bookbinding, etc.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb400" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy also insists that blind pupils should study history, geography and music. </span>
                  <span id="dtb401" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In the chapter on the teaching of geography, he mentions Maria Theresia von Paradis and stresses the importance of tactile maps and the terrestrial globe to illustrate the concepts of countries, lakes, rivers, mountains, etc. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1914" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb402">He goes on to describe the method of producing maps developed by von Paradis and Weissenburg </span>
                     <a id="dtb403" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_36">36</a>
                     <span id="dtb404">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e1926" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb405">As for music and the possibility of a blind person's earning his living as a musician, Haüy points to von Paradis's success and her system of raised musical notes </span>
                     <a id="dtb406" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_37">37</a>
                     <span id="dtb407">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb408" epub:type="z3998:sentence">When he touches on the teaching of mathematics, Haüy affirms that although he admires Saunderson and Weissenburg's "arithmetic boards", he firmly believes that blind and sighted children should be taught together and for this reason he does not agree with the use of special mathematical teaching aids for blind children. </span>
                  <span id="dtb409" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy does recognise that blind pupils may need some kind of assistance when drawing geometrical figures, for example, and had paper templates for this purpose.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e1950" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb410">Haüy's invention, a method of producing raised letters on paper with the types he had cast, was completely new </span>
                     <a id="dtb411" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_38">38</a>
                     <span id="dtb412">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb413" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He now saw as his principle task to attempt to produce as many copies of books for the blind as possible. </span>
                  <span id="dtb414" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He wanted every blind child to have his or her own collection of raised print books. </span>
                  <span id="dtb415" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In time he designed and had made a printing press which could produce raised print and to which he added a device for dyeing the raised letters black. </span>
                  <span id="d910e1971" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb416">The first two books printed by Haüy for his blind pupils were produced in this way </span>
                     <a id="dtb417" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_39">39</a>
                     <span id="dtb418">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb419" epub:type="z3998:sentence">One was his own treatise on education for the blind: Essai sur l'Education des Enfans-Aveugles (1786); the other a historical review of the institute's first five years of existence entitled Notice Historique de l'Institution des Enfans-Aveugles (1791).</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb420" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy believed that his printing method would make it possible for the blind to print books not only for their own use but also for the sighted. </span>
                  <span id="dtb421" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He dreamed of a time when his blind pupils would become teachers of sighted children; the blind teacher and the sighted pupils would read from the same book. </span>
                  <span id="dtb422" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy's method was, however, a form of printing, that is, it involved typographic composition, so to enable the blind to correspond with the sighted in a simpler fashion, Haüy designed a "writing board" on which the writer wrote with a steel pen which had an undivided nib. </span>
                  <span id="dtb423" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His idea was that the blind person should write his letter by hand on the one side of a suitable type of paper. </span>
                  <span id="dtb424" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This would produce raised letters on the other side of the paper, letters which the writer himself would be able to read by touch. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2006" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb425">Unfortunately, his apparatus was not of much use to those who had never seen letters </span>
                     <a id="dtb426" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_40">40</a>
                     <span id="dtb427">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb428" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The school in the Rue Victoires did more than provide its blind pupils with a basic education, it also taught them a useful trade. </span>
                  <span id="dtb429" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Their teachers believed in the positive value of work. </span>
                  <span id="dtb430" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The children spun thread, wove, knitted, made leather belts and hairnets, etc. </span>
                  <span id="dtb431" epub:type="z3998:sentence">They produced raised print but also printed in ink. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2034" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb432">Towards the end of his essay on the education of the blind, </span>
                     <a id="dtb433" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_41">41</a>
                     <span id="dtb434"> there are ten or so examples of the blind children's printing activities (invitation cards, announcements, invoices, prospectuses, etc.). </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb435" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Although Haüy had raised scores made, he did not at first consider music to be anything more than an entertainment for the blind.</span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_13" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="13"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e2056" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb436">He changed his opinion later when he discovered that the blind could learn to play the organ and thus could be employed as church organists </span>
                     <a id="dtb437" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_42">42</a>
                     <span id="dtb438">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e2071" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb439">The aim behind Haüy's teaching methods was to enable his blind pupils to communicate satisfactorily with the sighted </span>
                     <a id="dtb440" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_43">43</a>
                     <span id="dtb441">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb442" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He therefore rejected all writing systems for the blind which did not use the Roman alphabet. </span>
                  <span id="dtb443" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He would probably never have approved of Braille's system.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e2092" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb444">At first, boys and girls were taught together in mixed classes, but some years later, after Haüy had been severely criticised for the co-educational organisation of his school, the sexes were segregated </span>
                     <a id="dtb445" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_44">44</a>
                     <span id="dtb446">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e2107" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb447">Haüy's successor at the institute, Guillé, was himself severely criticised for his harsh methods of punishment </span>
                     <a id="dtb448" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_45">45</a>
                     <span id="dtb449">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb450" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In the accusations made against Guillé, his severity was compared with Haüy's mild methods and his concern for his pupils. </span>
                  <span id="dtb451" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It is not clear, however, whether the critics implied by this that Haüy never used corporal punishment.</span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e2127" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e2129">
                  <span id="dtb452" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.7 The French Revolution</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb453" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Louis XVI was Haüy's patron and the institute's most important financial sponsor. </span>
                  <span id="dtb454" epub:type="z3998:sentence">When the monarchy was overthrown in 1791, the Institute for the Blind came under the authority of the new revolutionary government. </span>
                  <span id="dtb455" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Education at the institute, however, continued along the same lines as it had done under the monarchy. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2146" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb456">The various revolutionary governments for their part believed that all forms of education should be free of charge and controlled by the State </span>
                     <a id="dtb457" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_46">46</a>
                     <span id="dtb458">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb459" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The National Convention issued a decree on 28th September 1791 which nationalised the Institute for the Blind. </span>
                  <span id="dtb460" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The need to reduce financial costs was responsible for the fusion of the Institute for the Blind and L'épée's Institute for the Deaf. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2167" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb461">The resulting institute was moved to a monastery </span>
                     <a id="dtb462" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_47">47</a>
                     <span id="dtb463">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb464" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This fusion, however, was unsuccessful, and in 1794 the National Convention decided to separate the two schools once more. </span>
                  <span id="dtb465" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy played an important part in this decision. </span>
                  <span id="dtb466" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He attacked l'épée's successor, Sicard, because he had criticised his teaching methods. </span>
                  <span id="dtb467" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was at that time a member of one of the revolutionary committees in Paris and was able to have Sicard arrested (Didier Weygand). </span>
                  <span id="dtb468" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Sicard was soon released, however, and two years later (1796) he had his revenge when he accused Haüy of belonging to an illegal secret society. </span>
                  <span id="dtb469" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was arrested and spent a brief spell in prison. </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e2201" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb470">After the break-up, the Institute for the Blind moved to a former convent at 34, Rue Denis, where it was renamed l'Institut National des Aveugles Travailleurs , that is The National Institute for Blind Craftsmen </span>
                     <a id="dtb471" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_48">48</a>
                     <span id="dtb472">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb473" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Coinciding with the move, the institute was reorganised and the pupils now had to contribute to the upkeep of the new, revolutionary France (28th July, 1795). </span>
                  <span id="dtb474" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The blind pupils' first task was to make 86 purses. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2219" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb475">At this point, the revolutionary committees began to debate whether institutes for the disabled should be classed as schools or asylums </span>
                     <a id="dtb476" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_49">49</a>
                     <span id="dtb477">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb478" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy initially sided with the Revolution. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2237" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb479">He was, as we said, an active member of one of the revolutionary committees </span>
                     <a id="dtb480" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_50">50</a>
                     <span id="dtb481">, and on 8th of June 1794, "the Day of Pure Reason", he did not hesitate to have his blind musicians appear on a mobile platform from which he, in revolutionary language, urged them to follow Robespierre, who was dressed as the high priest of Pure Reason </span>
                     <a id="dtb482" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_51">51</a>
                     <span id="dtb483">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_14" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="14"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb484" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Under the monarchy, his blind pupils regularly appeared in public to demonstrate their progress and these performances continued during the revolutionary period. </span>
                  <span id="dtb485" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy's ability to adapt to the different régimes would later go against him, however. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2268" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb486">During the Directorate, Haüy founded what was called a theophilanthropic cult with two other revolutionaries, La Revellère-Lepeaux and Chemin-Dupontè </span>
                     <a id="dtb487" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_52">52</a>
                     <span id="dtb488">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb489" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This could be described as a development of the cult of pure reason in which the magistrate assumed the role of the priest. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2283" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb490">The theophilanthropists substituted the head of the family for the priest; their philosophy was a mixture of theodicy and belief in the good individual </span>
                     <a id="dtb491" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_53">53</a>
                     <span id="dtb492">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb493" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy's successor as director of the institute (Guillé) was a strict Catholic who was horrified by Haüy's philosophical ideas. </span>
                  <span id="dtb494" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He later accused Haüy of heresy (amongst other things) as one of his reasons for not permitting Haüy to visit the institute. </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb495" epub:type="z3998:sentence">At the end of the revolutionary decade, the institute was bankrupt. </span>
                  <span id="dtb496" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The State owed the institute <span id="d910e2310" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">30 000</span> francs, apart from nine months' salary to teachers and other staff. </span>
                  <span id="dtb497" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Teachers and pupils alike starved and froze. </span>
                  <span id="dtb498" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy lodged a complaint with the consular government but this was rejected outright; no money was forthcoming. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2320" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb499">His activities during the Reign of Terror and the Directorate spoke against him </span>
                     <a id="dtb500" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_54">54</a>
                     <span id="dtb501">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="d910e2333" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb502">On 14th March 1801, Napoleon Bonaparte, now First Consul, decided that the Institute for Blind Craftsmen should be integrated into the Quinze-Vingt Hospital, an asylum for elderly blind people which had existed since the end of the 13th Century </span>
                     <a id="dtb503" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_55">55</a>
                     <span id="dtb504">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb505" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Napoleon furthermore forbade the theophilanthropists to practise their cult. </span>
                  <span id="dtb506" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Teaching at the institute was now reduced to two hours a day; during the rest of the day the blind children worked with sighted adults in the Quinze-Vingt workshops. </span>
                  <span id="dtb507" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was extremely affected and protested in three letters to the Minister of Interior Affairs (Lucien Bonaparte, one of Napoleon's brothers and Second Consul during the Second Consulate). </span>
                  <span id="d910e2354" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb508">The minister answered that the State was responsible for the education of the blind; Haüy's role was simply to carry out the State's orders </span>
                     <a id="dtb509" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_56">56</a>
                     <span id="dtb510">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb511" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The answer to the last of the letters (dated 12th February 1802) was Haüy's dismissal, although he was granted a pension of 2000 livres a year. </span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e2371" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e2373">
                  <span id="dtb512" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.8 Musée des Aveugles</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb513" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In spite of this adversity, Haüy did not give up. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2384" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb514">He was now assured of an annual income of 2000 livres, so it was not long before he founded a private institute for the blind which he called the Musée des Aveugles </span>
                     <a id="dtb515" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_57">57</a>
                     <span id="dtb516">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb517" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He planned that the new institute should complement the National Institute for the Blind. </span>
                  <span id="dtb518" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was divided into two departments: one for pre-school children aged between four and seven years of age, the other for pupils over the age of sixteen who were taught a trade. </span>
                  <span id="dtb519" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was thus a precursor of Fröbel as far as pre-school education is concerned. </span>
                  <span id="dtb520" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The new institute fulfilled another of Haüy's dreams. </span>
                  <span id="dtb521" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His blind adolescent pupils taught the sighted children who boarded in an annexe of the Musée des Aveugles. </span>
                  <span id="dtb522" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In the long run, however, Haüy could not make ends meet and had to close the institute in 1806. </span>
                  <span id="dtb523" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Weygand (1998), he simply did not have enough pupils.</span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb524" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky says that Haüy was very heavily in debt when he eventually arrived in St Petersburg. </span>
                  <span id="d910e2424" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb525">A Maltese banker, amongst others, demanded payment which was deducted from his salary in Russia </span>
                     <a id="dtb526" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_58">58</a>
                     <span id="dtb527">.</span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_15" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="15"/>
            </section><section id="d910e2441" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e2443">
                  <span id="dtb528" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.9 Valentin Haüy in Russia</span>
               </h2>
               <section id="d910e2449" epub:type="bodymatter">
                  <h3 id="d910e2451">
                     <span id="dtb529" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.9.1 An invitation from Alexander I</span>
                  </h3>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb530" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Word of Valentin Haüy's success soon spread throughout Europe. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2462" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb531">Several of the enlightened rulers were interested in acquiring his services </span>
                        <a id="dtb532" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_59">59</a>
                        <span id="dtb533">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb534" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Teaching of the blind had started both in Vienna and in Berlin and Haüy exported his typographic cases and material for use in object lessons to institutes for the blind in these two capitals and in other European cities. </span>
                     <span id="dtb535" epub:type="z3998:sentence">When his finances were so depleted that he had to close down the Musée des Aveugles, a number of welcome invitations arrived, one of them from Tsar Alexander I of Russia. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2480" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb536">The tsar, himself educated in the spirit of Enlightenment </span>
                        <a id="dtb537" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_60">60</a>
                        <span id="dtb538">, invited Haüy to come to Russia for the purpose of founding an institute for the blind </span>
                        <a id="dtb539" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_61">61</a>
                        <span id="dtb540">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb541" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Skrébitsky (1884), Alexander I employed a number of agents who informed him of every new idea that could successfully be introduced into Russia. </span>
                     <span id="dtb542" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Negotiations with Haüy were arranged by General Hitrowo, and plans were drawn up for the creation of an institute for the blind in St Petersburg. </span>
                     <span id="dtb543" epub:type="z3998:sentence">These plans show that Haüy had no intention of remaining in St Petersburg for any length of time. </span>
                     <span id="dtb544" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The project basically involved:</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb545" epub:type="z3998:sentence">1. </span>
                     <span id="dtb546" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The supervision, in Paris, of the production of all the teaching material destined for use in the education and occupation of blind children and adults in Russia. </span>
                     <span id="dtb547" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy promised to take with him to Russia educational material such as letters and numbers for reading, counting and printing, maps, writing boards, etc.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb548" epub:type="z3998:sentence">2. </span>
                     <span id="dtb549" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy would travel to Russia the following Spring (1804) and remain there for about a year, accompanied by one of his blind pupils who had been taught by his methods. </span>
                     <span id="dtb550" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy believed that his visit would bring success to the new institute and the ideas behind it and that it would encourage competition amongst the young Russians.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb551" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2544" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb552">Haüy, whose idea the project was, agreed to teach his methods faithfully to the person appointed by His Imperial Highness Alexander I to direct the St Petersburg Institute for the Blind </span>
                        <a id="dtb553" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_62">62</a>
                        <span id="dtb554">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb555" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Skrébitsky, the Russian government asked Haüy's advice on the personal qualities and qualifications required of the new director of the St Petersburg institute for the blind, and on the economic compensation Haüy was willing to accept to take on the responsibility of setting up the institute. </span>
                     <span id="dtb556" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The Russian government also wanted to know how much the project would cost. </span>
                     <span id="dtb557" epub:type="z3998:sentence">As to the necessary qualities and qualifications of the director of the institute, Haüy (according to Skrébitsky) would have answered that this person should be selected from amongst those teachers who had a good knowledge of Russian and French and, if possible, German. </span>
                     <span id="dtb558" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The Director must also have an elementary knowledge of practical activities such as spinning, knitting, the making of hairnets, different kinds of weaving, etc. </span>
                     <span id="dtb559" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy furthermore pointed out that the director must be familiar with the art of printing if he was to fulfil his task. </span>
                     <span id="dtb560" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Only an amateur's knowledge of music was required, however. </span>
                     <span id="dtb561" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy added that apart from these basic qualifications, the director must have a good head on his shoulders, be gentle and patient and have a love for mankind in general.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb562" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy asked his imperial highness for an annual salary of at least <span id="d910e2586" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">40 000</span> roubles, of which half would be paid in advance when Haüy began his work. </span>
                     <span id="dtb563" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He also asked the crown to provide, at no cost to himself, a furnished house, light and fuel.</span>
                  </p>
                  <span id="page_16" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="16"/>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb564" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Finally, he asked for <span id="d910e2601" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">2 000</span> roubles in advance, as travel allowance for himself and his blind pupil. </span>
                     <span id="dtb565" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy did not ask for travel allowances for his wife and son, who accompanied him to Russia. </span>
                     <span id="dtb566" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He estimated the costs of inventories, including teaching material such as maps and a globe, at <span id="d910e2610" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">4 500</span> francs and the annual operating costs, including salaries, at <span id="d910e2613" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">54 700</span> francs. </span>
                     <span id="dtb567" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The institute should be staffed by three teachers, one of them a music teacher, and a manager for the printing works.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb568" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy estimated that costs would decrease as the pupils progressed in their activities. </span>
                     <span id="dtb569" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This he based on his experience in Paris where his pupils, once they had acquired a certain degree of skill in handicrafts and printing were able to make a profit for the institute. </span>
                     <span id="dtb570" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was convinced that his experience in Paris could be transferred to St Petersburg, which shows how little he knew about the country he was about to visit.</span>
                  </p>
               </section>
               <section id="d910e2634" epub:type="bodymatter">
                  <h3 id="d910e2636">
                     <span id="dtb571" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.9.2 Berlin</span>
                  </h3>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb572" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy made a stop in Berlin en route to Russia in 1806. </span>
                     <span id="dtb573" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He had already received a request from the king of Prussia who wondered if Haüy would be interested in founding a school for the blind in Berlin. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2650" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb574">In Prussia initiatives had already been taken in the 1780s to gain State control of all educational activities </span>
                        <a id="dtb575" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_63">63</a>
                        <span id="dtb576">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb577" epub:type="z3998:sentence">King Frederick William III introduced Haüy to professor Johan August Zeune (1778-1853), who was already engaged in teaching blind children. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2665" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb578">Haüy and Zeune together designed a curriculum for an institute for the blind in Berlin </span>
                        <a id="dtb579" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_64">64</a>
                        <span id="dtb580">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb581" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Professor Zeune later became the director of the institute. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2681" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb582">In Berlin as in Paris attempts were made to fulfil an important pedagogical objective: the combination of a theoretical-humanistic education and practical activities </span>
                        <a id="dtb583" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_65">65</a>
                        <span id="dtb584">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="d910e2693" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb585">The battle of Jena and Auerstedt delayed Haüy's departure for St Petersburg, but in spite of this delay, he took time during the journey from Berlin to make a detour to Mitau in Kurland (today Jelgava in Latvia), where the Bourbon pretender to the French throne, Louis XVIII, was living in exile </span>
                        <a id="dtb586" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_66">66</a>
                        <span id="dtb587">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb588" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy paid his respects to Louis XVIII, who assured him of his support when he returned to France.</span>
                  </p>
               </section>
               <section id="d910e2710" epub:type="bodymatter">
                  <h3 id="d910e2712">
                     <span id="dtb589" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.9.3 In St Petersburg</span>
                  </h3>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb590" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy arrived in St Petersburg on September 9th 1806, and five days later sent a letter to the Tsar in which he sought an audience for himself and his seventeen-year-old blind pupil. </span>
                     <span id="dtb591" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He wrote that he thought the Tsar would be interested in meeting a blind person who was not only skilled in a handicraft but could also read and write and was well-versed in academic subjects such as history and geography. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2726" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb592">Haüy also wished to demonstrate an invention of his, the "advanced telegraph" </span>
                        <a id="dtb593" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_67">67</a>
                        <span id="dtb594">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb595" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky states that he was unable to find any sources indicating that the Tsar actually received Haüy.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb596" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy's financial problems increased since none of the promises he had been given of compensation, a house, etc., were fulfilled. </span>
                     <span id="dtb597" epub:type="z3998:sentence">On 11th October 1806, he wrote a petition to the Tsar in which he set out his complaints. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2750" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb598">Skrébitsky says that he has found the letter in question and that it had a note in the margin (with a signature which probably belonged to the Minister of the General Education, Count Zawadowsky) which read, "The Tsar ordered this bill to be paid, premises to be found for the institute and a director who would learn Haüy's teaching methods to be selected and appointed to the institute" </span>
                        <a id="dtb599" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_68">68</a>
                        <span id="dtb600">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb601" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Eight days after Haüy presented his petition, the money he had been promised was paid.</span>
                  </p>
                  <span id="page_17" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="17"/>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb602" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The person who became head of the new institute for the blind was a certain Bouchoueff, who taught at a school in St Petersburg and claimed he was sufficiently fluent in French to be able to converse with Haüy and learn his pedagogical ideas. </span>
                     <span id="dtb603" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Bouchoueff was to live in Haüy's house. </span>
                     <span id="dtb604" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A report from the ministry dated 10th March 1807 shows that Haüy employed two assistants to work with Bouchoueff and himself. </span>
                     <span id="dtb605" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Fournier, Haüy's blind pupil, helped to instruct these assistants. </span>
                     <span id="dtb606" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy invited public officials and members of the Russian Academy of Science to be present during Fournier's lectures, hoping to enlist their support. </span>
                     <span id="dtb607" epub:type="z3998:sentence">However, there were still no blind pupils. </span>
                     <span id="dtb608" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy was told that the lack of pupils arose from the fact that there were no blind people in Russia. </span>
                     <span id="dtb609" epub:type="z3998:sentence">To this, Haüy replied:</span>
                  </p>
                  <blockquote id="dtb610">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb611" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"If no blind people are to be seen on the streets, this is because the head of the family keeps them at home and because orphans and the children of imperial serfs are placed in asylums. </span>
                        <span id="dtb612" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was not long before events proved my assumption to be correct, not to mention the blind beggars who had escaped the surveillance of the police and to whom I hastened to give alms. </span>
                        <span id="dtb613" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I would gladly have quadrupled the alms had they consented to regard the money as a daily wage in exchange for their work."</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <p>
                     <span id="d910e2815" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <a id="dtb614" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_69">69</a>
                        <span id="dtb615">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb616" epub:type="z3998:sentence">At this time, St Petersburg was a town with a multicultural population. </span>
                     <span id="dtb617" epub:type="z3998:sentence">There were many families of French origin; French was, in fact, the language used by the educated classes; reviews and newspapers were published in French. </span>
                     <span id="dtb618" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In his quest for pupils, Haüy placed advertisements in Le Lycée, a review, and in the daily Gazette de Petersbourg. </span>
                     <span id="dtb619" epub:type="z3998:sentence">These advertisements brought him two new pupils, both of foreign extraction.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb620" epub:type="z3998:sentence">After some time, a Russian woman came to Haüy asking him to help her blind son who was an inmate of the asylum in Smolny . </span>
                     <span id="dtb621" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy went to Smolny where he found several blind children living with the aged and the handicapped inmates. </span>
                     <span id="dtb622" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He took the son of the woman who had asked for his help back to St Petersburg with him and asked the authorities for permission to teach the other blind children in Smolny. </span>
                     <span id="dtb623" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The children were to be picked up by coach, in twos, and later returned to the asylum. </span>
                     <span id="dtb624" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy himself would undertake to teach the boys, while his wife would teach the little girls. </span>
                     <span id="dtb625" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The director of the Smolny asylum, however, refused to give his permission. </span>
                     <span id="dtb626" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy then sent a written request to the "Committee for General Beneficence" and later to the "Civil Governor", who promised to grant Haüy's request as soon as he found time to do so. </span>
                     <span id="dtb627" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He never had, however, any spare time. </span>
                     <span id="dtb628" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In the same document (dated 10th March 1807), Haüy also complained about his cramped lodgings which made it impossible for him to take in more than one blind pupil at a time. </span>
                     <span id="dtb629" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His other pupil, from Moscow, had to lodge elsewhere in the town. </span>
                     <span id="dtb630" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy asked the authorities to provide him with the house he had been promised to enable him to establish his school under more suitable conditions. </span>
                     <span id="d910e2877" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb631">In his letter Haüy also mentioned his two assistants and praised Bouchoueff, but complained about the latter's " weak health, which permitted him to dedicate only half-days to studies which required at least a year of continuous dedication" </span>
                        <a id="dtb632" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_70">70</a>
                        <span id="dtb633">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb634" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Was it for tactical reasons that Haüy praised Bouchoueff, who obviously did not make any major contribution to the work of the institute? </span>
                     <span id="d910e2895" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <span id="dtb635">Haüy did not receive much help from his two assistants either, since they drank and turned out to be generally inept </span>
                        <a id="dtb636" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_71">71</a>
                        <span id="dtb637">. </span>
                     </span>
                     <span id="dtb638" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Two other persons, however, announced their interest in teaching at Haüy's school. </span>
                     <span id="dtb639" epub:type="z3998:sentence">They were Galitch, a student at the Institute of Pedagogy in St Petersburg, and Louet, a French immigrant (a naturalized Russian citizen), who offered to give music classes.</span>
                  </p>
                  <span id="page_18" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="18"/>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb640" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Galitch taught a pupil who came from the Kronstadt fortress in the Bay of Finland and who spoke only Russian. </span>
                     <span id="dtb641" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Skrébitsky, Bouchoueff had already lost heart in his work.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb642" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy had intended to reproduce the printing works he had had at the Institution des Jeunes Aveugles. </span>
                     <span id="dtb643" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A printing press was a major investment, but it had paid off well in Paris, and had, in fact, been the means of earning a regular income for the blind pupils and the institute. </span>
                     <span id="dtb644" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy valued very highly the trades associated with printing. </span>
                     <span id="dtb645" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In the document dated 10th March 1807, he asked permission to establish a printing works at the institute, where not only ordinary books and books in raised print for the blind could be produced, but also such articles as visiting cards and other texts not subject to official censorship. </span>
                     <span id="dtb646" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Finally, he asked to be given the use of one of the crown's empty buildings for his institute, and to be allowed to select young blind people who could benefit from his teaching methods from the asylums, especially the Smolny asylum. </span>
                     <span id="dtb647" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He also wished to appoint staff to take charge of the administration of the institute.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb648" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In his petition, Haüy also stressed that he had agreed to teach according to his methods for a period of one year, but that to date he had only been allowed to teach one pupil. </span>
                     <span id="dtb649" epub:type="z3998:sentence">By May 1807, Haüy still had no premises and once again sent a petition to the Minister of General Education in which he referred to former unfulfilled promises. </span>
                     <span id="dtb650" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He had been given a building, but it turned out to be unsuitable for a school. </span>
                     <span id="dtb651" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He further mentioned that attempts were still being made to convince him that there were no blind people in Russia, but that he had seen the many blind beggars for himself and had also seen many blind children in Smolny whom he would gladly teach.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb652" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It has already been said that Haüy did have a few pupils, one of whom lived in his house. </span>
                     <span id="dtb653" epub:type="z3998:sentence">As there was no reaction from the minister, Haüy, who now only had four months of his contract left, decided to occupy the building offered in spite of the fact that it was not in a fit condition to house a school. </span>
                     <span id="dtb654" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Bouchoueff was still unwell and of little use to him. </span>
                     <span id="dtb655" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His two assistants, Galitch and Louet, however, did an excellent job.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb656" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Once again Haüy asked to be allowed to select some blind children from the Smolny asylum as pupils. </span>
                     <span id="dtb657" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky states that he found no answer to this letter, although he did discover a decision by the tsar, dated 10th August 1807, giving Haüy permission to teach 15 pupils at an annual cost of <span id="d910e2986" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">14 150</span> roubles with an extra allowance of <span id="d910e2989" class="num-with-space" epub:type="z3998:word">5 185</span> roubles, but this did not solve Haüy's problems. </span>
                     <span id="dtb658" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Now the authorities concerned began to harass him and demand that he should deduct the amount granted from what he had previously received. </span>
                     <span id="dtb659" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In addition, a heated debate ensued on the carriage required by Haüy to transport his purchases to the institute. </span>
                     <span id="dtb660" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The discussion ended when the tsar ordered General Hitrowo to tell Haüy to conduct himself in a proper manner.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb661" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Prior to that curt, rather perfunctory decision, Baron Dolst, director of secondary schools, had been ordered to inspect Haüy's school. </span>
                     <span id="dtb662" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The inspection was preceded by a letter from Haüy to the minister of education, in which he wrote:</span>
                  </p>
                  <blockquote id="dtb663">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb664" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"In answer to the objections expressed over the fact that I have undertaken to prepare my successor to take charge of the institute in six months or a year, I answer that this is quite correct but that the note referred to clearly states that there were two conditions: 1. </span>
                        <span id="dtb665" epub:type="z3998:sentence">That I would be given a sufficient number of blind pupils;2. </span>
                        <span id="dtb666" epub:type="z3998:sentence">That my colleague would be chosen in competition amongst those who in a special examination would be tested to see whether they possessed the talents required for this kind of education, which demands knowledge beyond what is expected in ordinary schools.</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <span id="page_19" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="19"/>
                  <blockquote id="dtb667">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb668" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I remain in your service as temporary head of the institute only because my colleague, who at an inopportune moment assured the ministry that he could manage the institute by himself, is far from fit to do so. </span>
                        <span id="dtb669" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I have, for several reasons, twenty times addressed M. </span>
                        <span id="dtb670" epub:type="z3998:sentence">De Novossilzeff at the chancellery, as my colleague has not dedicated sufficient time to his teaching. </span>
                        <span id="dtb671" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It would be beneficial if he would show his talents today rather than wait until tomorrow! </span>
                        <span id="dtb672" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I am in haste to leave a difficult profession, which I have exercised for 37 years and as my wishes now have been fulfilled and I can no longer be of any use, not even to Russia, I will enjoy the rest I am truly in need of.</span>
                     </p>
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb673" epub:type="z3998:sentence">When I finally plead the justness of my demands, it is no criticism of the Tsar, the ministry or any of its respected officials. </span>
                        <span id="dtb674" epub:type="z3998:sentence">M. </span>
                        <span id="dtb675" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Bouchoueff alone is the reason why the Government, without realising it, has neglected its obligations to me."</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <p>
                     <span id="d910e3066" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <a id="dtb676" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_72">72</a>
                        <span id="dtb677">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb678" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This letter clearly shows that at this time relations between Haüy and Bouchoueff were extremely strained.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb679" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Baron Dolst admitted in his report after his inspection of the institute (13th August 1808) that the premises to which it had moved were not suitable, located as they were on the fourth floor, with the dormitories next to the earth closets. </span>
                     <span id="dtb680" epub:type="z3998:sentence">As to the teaching at the institute, Dolst affirmed that he could find no differences in knowledge between the pupils taught by Haüy and those taught by Bouchoueff. </span>
                     <span id="dtb681" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He did find that a few pupils had made considerable progress in reading after following Haüy's methods, but that printing had had to be abandoned for lack of typecast. </span>
                     <span id="dtb682" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Basket-making and straw plaiting for chair bottoms were taught at the institute; the girls learned how to make hairnets and to knit. </span>
                     <span id="dtb683" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Dolst considered that the teaching of handicrafts had achieved good results.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb684" epub:type="z3998:sentence">As for the teaching of music, however, Dolst was not satisfied. </span>
                     <span id="dtb685" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The children had learnt only three French and two Italian songs. </span>
                     <span id="dtb686" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The Baron did not find this lack of progress so remarkable, since the songs were all in foreign languages. </span>
                     <span id="dtb687" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He therefore suggested that the immigrant Louet should be replaced by a Russian music teacher who would be assisted by a blind person by the name of Shiline.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb688" epub:type="z3998:sentence">After the inspection, Haüy asked Dolst if he might hand in his resignation and leave the institute together with Fournier and Louet. </span>
                     <span id="dtb689" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Dolst submitted Haüy's letter of resignation to the minister of education. </span>
                     <span id="dtb690" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In it he asked to be relieved of his duties because of the serious conflict between himself and Bouchoueff.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb691" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Skrébitsky, neither Dolst's report nor Haüy's letter of resignation had any effect, and Haüy continued as head of the institute until 1817. </span>
                     <span id="dtb692" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Bouchoueff, too, retained his post at the institute and shortly afterwards disbanded the girls' section (which consisted of three pupils).</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb693" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky claims to have found notes by an anonymous writer in one of the archives. </span>
                     <span id="dtb694" epub:type="z3998:sentence">These notes proved that the original intention was to admit two categories of pupils to the institute: the poor, who would learn reading, writing, typesetting, music and handicrafts, and the well-to-do, who would learn writing, geography, poetry, etc. </span>
                     <span id="dtb695" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Religion would be a compulsory subject for both social groups.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb696" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The author of the note was of the opinion that the Rosminazoffs' house, where the institute was located, was very suitable in spite of the fact that both Baron Dolst and Haüy thought the contrary. </span>
                     <span id="dtb697" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He was also very critical of Haüy, who he found had made improper use of his position by appropriating the best rooms for his own personal use.</span>
                  </p>
                  <span id="page_20" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="20"/>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb698" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The children's dormitory was cold in winter and stiflingly hot in summer. </span>
                     <span id="dtb699" epub:type="z3998:sentence">To make matters worse, they were obliged to pass through the bedroom to empty their chamber pots. </span>
                     <span id="dtb700" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Music classes, study and a variety of activities were held in the general classroom while normal classes were going on. </span>
                     <span id="dtb701" epub:type="z3998:sentence">At one table, pupils were taught reading or grammar, at another arithmetic. </span>
                     <span id="dtb702" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The space for printing works was in one corner, while in the centre of the room, pupils played the piano or the violin. </span>
                     <span id="dtb703" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The anonymous author added that Haüy's son or his pupil Fournier sometimes amused themselves by adding to the general noise by starting up the lathe in order to disturb the Russian teachers at their work, and so that later they would be able to criticise their methods.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb704" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The unknown critic also took a very negative view of the teaching of handicrafts. </span>
                     <span id="dtb705" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It had, for example, taken a whole year to teach a pupil to plait and the finished result was a mere half archine which would only fetch 10 kopeks. </span>
                     <span id="dtb706" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He also noted that the printing press was used only to print brochures about Haüy's telegraph, with the result that the type was worn and could not be used for its original purpose. </span>
                     <span id="dtb707" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The author accused Fournier, who was in charge of these activities, of deliberately destroying the type. </span>
                     <span id="dtb708" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The lathe was in equally bad shape, the music teaching deficient, etc. </span>
                     <span id="dtb709" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The author ends by suggesting that the French teachers should be dismissed and replaced by Russians.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb710" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy very much resented what he considered to be harassment which Skrébitsky believes Bouchoueff was responsible for. </span>
                     <span id="dtb711" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In a letter dated 19th August 1808, Haüy asked Count Zawadowsky (the minister of education) to order Baron Dolst to continue his inspections and demanded that examinations should be held in French in the presence of witnesses. </span>
                     <span id="dtb712" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy wanted to be able to refute any criticism which might be made of his work and had no desire to be at the mercy of the caprice of a single judge. </span>
                     <span id="dtb713" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This letter was followed by another to Baron Dolst, in which Haüy asked to be allowed to participate in decisions concerning the final organisation of the institute. </span>
                     <span id="dtb714" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He yet again asked to be moved to more suitable premises and requested a list of poor blind children who might be admitted to the institute and another of well-to-do children who might be potential pupils.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb715" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Bouchoueff died before Haüy left Russia. </span>
                     <span id="dtb716" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Skrébitsky, there are no sources which might explain why Haüy stayed in Russia for as long as eleven years, in spite of all adversities. </span>
                     <span id="dtb717" epub:type="z3998:sentence">An official document dated 6th May 1817 makes it clear that Haüy wished to leave the institute. </span>
                     <span id="dtb718" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It is a letter is addressed to Prince Galitzin (who had replaced Zawadowsky as minister of education). </span>
                     <span id="dtb719" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In it, Haüy asks to be removed from office or to be granted six months leave for himself and Fournier. </span>
                     <span id="dtb720" epub:type="z3998:sentence">As Haüy was in a state of ill health by this time, Galitzin agreed to his dismissal, stating that he would thus be able to end his days in the bosom of his family. </span>
                     <span id="dtb721" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The French ambassador requested permission to take Haüy and Fournier back to France aboard a warship which was soon to leave. </span>
                     <span id="dtb722" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The Tsar gave his approval to the application and on Haüy's departure decorated him with the Order of Saint Vladimir, fourth class.</span>
                  </p>
               </section>
               <section id="d910e3253" epub:type="bodymatter">
                  <h3 id="d910e3255">
                     <span id="dtb723" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.9.4 Haüy's last will and testament</span>
                  </h3>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb724" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Before returning to France, Haüy wrote one more letter to the minister of education, Prince Galitzin, which Skrébitsky sees as Haüy's last will and testament:</span>
                  </p>
                  <blockquote id="dtb725">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb726" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"It is urgent</span>
                     </p>
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb727" epub:type="z3998:sentence">1) that you appoint in my place Mr. </span>
                        <span id="dtb728" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Protopopoff, an honest family man who has really made himself familiar with all aspects of our work.</span>
                     </p>
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb729" epub:type="z3998:sentence">(2) The ministry must provide him with a worthy collaborator who can assist him by behaving appropriately and who possesses the necessary talents for the post. </span>
                        <span id="dtb730" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I have already nominated young Vaganoff as a worthy successor to this post.</span>
                     </p>
                     <span id="page_21" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="21"/>
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb731" epub:type="z3998:sentence">(3) The minister, rather than the inspector, who does more harm than good, must appoint a person who will direct only the teaching of such handicrafts as may prepare the blind pupils for a trade. (4) For Fournier's post, the ministry should appoint the three blind pupils Smourof, Vemblad and Stiaguine and have them divide his honoraries into three equal parts. </span>
                        <span id="dtb732" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I take advantage of this occasion to ask the minister to persist in encouraging these three blind pupils and the three sighted members of the staff to manage the institute without external help. (5) The ministry must increase the number of pupils so that the institute Haüy founded can function successfully. </span>
                        <span id="dtb733" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The number of blind pupils has been restricted to 15, which is too few. </span>
                        <span id="dtb734" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This fact has constituted a major impediment to the institute's success, as we, for example, have had to allow our pupils to carry out a number of activities for which, to be successful, at least 60 pupils would have been necessary."</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <p>
                     <span id="d910e3314" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <a id="dtb735" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_73">73</a>
                        <span id="dtb736">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
               </section>
               <section id="d910e3326" epub:type="bodymatter">
                  <h3 id="d910e3328">
                     <span id="dtb737" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.9.5 The education of deaf pupils in St Petersburg</span>
                  </h3>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb738" epub:type="z3998:sentence">At an early date, Haüy had become interested in the abbé l'épée's teaching of the deaf. </span>
                     <span id="dtb739" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky (1884) says that in 1784, the abbé l'épée on one occasion himself entrusted Haüy with the teaching of a deaf person. </span>
                     <span id="dtb740" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky's source was probably a footnote in Haüy's Essai sur l'Education des Aveugles. </span>
                     <span id="dtb741" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In one chapter, Haüy writes that he wished to compare the teaching of the blind with that of the deaf. </span>
                     <span id="dtb742" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This chapter, however, is mainly a panegyric dedicated to the abbé l'épée. </span>
                     <span id="dtb743" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In passing, however, Haüy says that he can testify to the fact that it is much easier to teach the blind than the deaf. </span>
                     <span id="dtb744" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In the footnote mentioned, Haüy states that he had had the opportunity of following the progress of a young deaf man who had been shipwrecked and washed ashore on the coast of Normandy. </span>
                     <span id="dtb745" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy also promised that the partially deaf man would write his autobiography and that his blind pupils would print it. </span>
                     <span id="dtb746" epub:type="z3998:sentence">That promise, to the best of my knowledge, was never kept.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb747" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In October 1807, a Russian lady approached Haüy and asked him to teach her deaf daughter. </span>
                     <span id="dtb748" epub:type="z3998:sentence">According to Skrébitsky's sources, Haüy commented on this as follows:</span>
                  </p>
                  <blockquote id="dtb749">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb750" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"She imagined that I would agree to teach her daughter, Eugénie, who had been tormented by deafness since her early years. </span>
                        <span id="dtb751" epub:type="z3998:sentence">In vain I tried to dissuade her, on the pretext of my lack of practical experience of this difficult art, which often surpasses the capacity of even the very well-prepared. </span>
                        <span id="dtb752" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Eventually I had to give in and accept. </span>
                        <span id="dtb753" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The very limited progress I made with her soon attracted attention and further pupils were sent to me."</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <p>
                     <span id="d910e3394" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <a id="dtb754" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_74">74</a>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb755" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy invited the public to observe his efforts in order to show the progress which could be made by means of methods of teaching the deaf which had developed in France.
       </span>
                     <span id="dtb756" epub:type="z3998:sentence">His work aroused great surprise and admiration, although there were also sceptics. </span>
                     <span id="dtb757" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Skrébitsky quotes Haüy, who recounts an incident which occurred during one of his public classes:</span>
                  </p>
                  <blockquote id="dtb758">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb759" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"One day, during one of my classes, when I had just finished praising the abbé l'épée and the abbé Sicard and was commenting on my admiration of the intelligence usually shown by my deaf-dumb pupils, a member of the audience pointed out that these children, whom Nature had treated so unkindly, only repeated, in parrot-fashion, what had been poured into their minds by their teachers. </span>
                        <span id="dtb760" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The person in question was suggesting that it was useless to teach this type of pupil. </span>
                        <span id="dtb761" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Considering all that has been achieved by the famous men who developed these teaching methods, this asseveration appeared to me a mockery of their talents and I was filled with a desire to defend them to the utmost, if they should indeed require my help.</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <span id="page_22" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="22"/>
                  <blockquote id="dtb762">
                     <p>
                        <span id="dtb763" epub:type="z3998:sentence">M. l'abbé Sicard receives daily proof of the intelligence of the deaf-dumb when he gives them written exercises, when he makes them understand and when he sets them questions on subjects such as physics and morale..."</span>
                     </p>
                  </blockquote>
                  <p>
                     <span id="d910e3443" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                        <a id="dtb764" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_75">75</a>
                        <span id="dtb765">.</span>
                     </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb766" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy did not become deeply involved in the teaching of the deaf, but did manage to arouse the interest of the Dowager Tsarina who had experts brought from France. </span>
                     <span id="dtb767" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Among them was a M. </span>
                     <span id="dtb768" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Jouffret, who became the most prominent figure in the teaching of the deaf during its pioneering years. </span>
                     <span id="dtb769" epub:type="z3998:sentence">However, writes Skrébitsky, after the initial period of interest, the teaching of the blind and the deaf was soon forgotten.</span>
                  </p>
               </section>
            </section><section id="d910e3470" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e3472">
                  <span id="dtb770" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.10 Haüy's telegraph</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb771" epub:type="z3998:sentence">During his years of teaching, Haüy continued to take an interest in ciphers and codes. </span>
                  <span id="d910e3483" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb772">He was, for example, very interested in the telegraph and its use in military intelligence </span>
                     <a id="dtb773" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_76">76</a>
                     <span id="dtb774"> (this was before electricity was in general use). </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb775" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy also probably saw the telegraph as a means of earning money. </span>
                  <span id="dtb776" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The criticisms made against him by his opponents (section 3.9.3) are proof that telegraphic experimentation and the printing of brochures took place at the institute. </span>
                  <span id="dtb777" epub:type="z3998:sentence">When Haüy first arrived in St Petersburg, he tried to interest the tsar in his telegraphic invention. </span>
                  <span id="d910e3505" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb778">In a letter dated 1st July 1807, he described his invention and enclosed a brochure entitled Mémoire historique abrévé sur les télégraphes en général et sur les télégraphes de St Pétersbourg 1801 </span>
                     <a id="dtb779" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_77">77</a>
                     <span id="dtb780">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb781" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Haüy called his telegraph the "pasigraph". </span>
                  <span id="dtb782" epub:type="z3998:sentence">It was based on a system of writing in which the symbols corresponded not to sounds but to concepts such as numbers or musical notes. </span>
                  <span id="dtb783" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He explained that the system could be used during the day and at night by a simple addition to the machine. </span>
                  <span id="dtb784" epub:type="z3998:sentence">The pasigraph was based on five elements of information: </span>
               </p>
               <blockquote id="dtb785">
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb786" epub:type="z3998:sentence">"1. </span>
                     <span id="dtb787" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A stenographic and sound alphabet;</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb788" epub:type="z3998:sentence">2. </span>
                     <span id="dtb789" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A numerical element</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb790" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3. </span>
                     <span id="dtb791" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A word element. </span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb792" epub:type="z3998:sentence">4. </span>
                     <span id="dtb793" epub:type="z3998:sentence">A grammatical element and</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb794" epub:type="z3998:sentence">5. finally, a format.</span>
                  </p>
                  <p>
                     <span id="dtb795" epub:type="z3998:sentence">These five elements of information, which together can be fitted onto a surface of about 4 archines in length and 1 archine in width, are sufficient to permit simple and rapid communication of all forms of speech, regardless of the language used. </span>
                     <span id="dtb796" epub:type="z3998:sentence">I ascribe to the secretaries and interpreters a knowledge of grammar and of the most important languages, for which the Russians show great skill. </span>
                     <span id="dtb797" epub:type="z3998:sentence">This prior knowledge permits them, in just a few days, to learn my system, my five elements of information and their use"</span>
                  </p>
               </blockquote>
               <p>
                  <span id="d910e3593" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <a id="dtb798" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_78">78</a>
                     <span id="dtb799">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb800" epub:type="z3998:sentence">To support his idea, Haüy contracted a mechanic by the name of Winzelmeyer to construct a small model of the pasigraph. </span>
                  <span id="dtb801" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He demonstrated his invention to the head of the Russian Academy of Science, Novossiltzeff. </span>
                  <span id="dtb802" epub:type="z3998:sentence">When the Minister of the Navy, Tchitchagoff, appointed a commission in 1808 to express its opinion on the British and French telegraphic systems, Haüy was present. </span>
                  <span id="dtb803" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He was given the opportunity to test his pasigraph between the fortress of Kronstad and a frigate anchored seven verst off the coast of St Petersburg. </span>
                  <span id="d910e3618" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb804">The experiment was successful as to speed and precision; however, it is not known what became of Haüy's telegraph </span>
                     <a id="dtb805" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_79">79</a>
                     <span id="dtb806">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
            </section><section id="d910e3633" epub:type="bodymatter">
               <h2 id="d910e3635">
                  <span id="dtb807" epub:type="z3998:sentence">3.11 The final years</span>
               </h2>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb808" epub:type="z3998:sentence">After the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1814, the National Institute in Paris became once more an autonomous entity. </span>
                  <span id="d910e3646" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb809">The new director was Sebastien Guillé, a doctor of medicine, a fanatical royalist and an orthodox Roman Catholic </span>
                     <a id="dtb810" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_80">80</a>
                     <span id="dtb811">. </span>
                  </span>
                  <span id="dtb812" epub:type="z3998:sentence">He forbade Haüy to visit the school since he considered that he had betrayed the French monarchy during the Revolution. </span>
                  <span id="d910e3661" epub:type="z3998:sentence">
                     <span id="dtb813">He was particularly critical of Haüy's attitude to religion </span>
                     <a id="dtb814" class="endnote" epub:type="noteref" href="chapter7.xhtml#fn_81">81</a>
                     <span id="dtb815">. </span>
                  </span>
               </p>
               <span id="page_23" class="page-normal" epub:type="pagebreak" title="23"/>
               <p>
                  <span id="dtb816" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Not until 1821 was Valentin Haüy able to revisit his old school, which had then been extended to admit some 60 pupils. </span>
                  <span id="dtb817" epub:type="z3998:sentence">During a ceremony held on 21st August 1821, Haüy was honoured for his pioneering work in the education of the blind. </span>
                  <span id="dtb818" epub:type="z3998:sentence">One of the participants in that ceremony was the young Louis Braille, who had joined the institute in 1819.
				 </span>
                  <span id="dtb819" epub:type="z3998:sentence">Valentin Haüy died on 18th March 1822, at his brother's home in Paris. </span>
               </p>
            </section></body></html>